100 massa web3 page (#105)
massalabs/docs: docs/build/massa-web3/smart-contracts.mdx

---
id: massa-web3-smart-contracts
title: Smart contract operations
---

# Smart contract operations

> Smart contract operations are accessible under the smartcontracts sub-client which is accessible via the smartContracts() method on the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contract operations are accessible under the smart contracts sub-client which is accessible via the `smartContracts()` method on the client.
```

Reviewer: Either use `smartContracts` or smart contracts.

> Smart Contracts Client object enables smart contract deployment, calls and streaming of events.

Reviewer: I see no mention of events in this section.

`SmartContractsClient` documentation can be found [here](https://web3.docs.massa.net/classes/SmartContractsClient.html).

### Deployment

> Once the smart contract WASM is available, it becomes quite straightforward to deploy it with the `deploySmartContract` method. This method

Reviewer: Keep it simple!
```suggestion
The `deploySmartContract` method allows to deploy a smart contract using the WASM binary. This method
```

takes a [`IContractData`](https://web3.docs.massa.net/interfaces/IContractData.html) object as parameter and returns the operation id of the operation.
If no executor is provided, the default wallet account from the provided WalletClient will be used.

```typescript

> const opId: string = await web3Client.smartContracts().deploySmartContract(

Reviewer: I think there is a `maxCoins` parameter as well now.

Reviewer: It may apply elsewhere as well!

  {
    fee: 0n,
    maxGas: 2000000n,
    contractDataBinary: compiledScFromSource.binary,
    datastore: new Map<Uint8Array, Uint8Array>(),
  } as IContractData,
  baseAccount
);
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:92](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L92)

### Get the operation status

Smart contracts undergo various transaction statuses before they reach block finality on chain. The public enum describing these statuses is:

```EOperationStatus {
	INCLUDED_PENDING,
	AWAITING_INCLUSION,
	FINAL,
	INCONSISTENT,
	NOT_FOUND
}
```

You can easily get the status of a smart contract operation with the `getOperationStatus` method. This method takes an operation id as parameter and returns the [operation status](https://web3.docs.massa.net/enums/EOperationStatus.html).

```typescript
const status: EOperationStatus = await web3Client
  .smartContracts()
  .getOperationStatus(deploymentOperationId);
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:408](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L408)

### Awaiting operation status

> There are cases, however, when one might need to wait for a specific status to be reached. This can be achieved using the 'awaitRequiredOperationStatus'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are cases, however, when one might need to wait for a specific status to be reached. This can be achieved using the `awaitRequiredOperationStatus`
```

a certain amount of time or after reaching a limited number of errors. In practice, these limits have been found to be sufficient for most standard use cases.

```typescript
const status: EOperationStatus = await web3Client
  .smartContracts()
  .awaitRequiredOperationStatus(
    deploymentOperationId,
    EOperationStatus.INCLUDED_PENDING
  );
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:435](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L435)

### Smart contract balance

The balance of a smart contract can be retrieved with the `getContractBalance` method. This method takes a smart contract address as parameter and returns the balance of the smart contract
as a [`IBalance`](https://web3.docs.massa.net/interfaces/IBalance.html) object.

```typescript
const balance: IBalance | null = await web3Client
  .smartContracts()
  .getContractBalance(contractAddress);
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:287](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L287)

### Read operations

> Smart contract data can be read via the `readSmartContract` method. It executes a dry run Smart contract call and returns some data regarding 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contract data can be read via the `readSmartContract` method. It executes a dry run smart contract call and returns some data regarding 
```

> Smart contract data can be read via the `readSmartContract` method. It executes a dry run Smart contract call and returns some data regarding 

Reviewer: There's probably a confusion with the `executeReadOnly` method ?

> its execution such as the changes of in the states that would have happen if the transaction was really executed on chain.

Reviewer: Needs to be rephrased!

```typescript
const data: IContractReadOperationResponse = await web3Client
  .smartContracts()
  .readSmartContract({
    fee: 0n,
    maxGas: 200000n,
    targetAddress: scAddress,
    targetFunction: "getGameState",
    parameter: new Args().serialize(), // this is based on input arguments
  } as IReadData);
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:231](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L231)

The returned data is contained in an object of type [`IContractReadOperationResponse`](https://web3.docs.massa.net/interfaces/IContractReadOperationResponse.html) under the key 
`returnedValue` which is of type Uint8Array.

> Depending on the smart contract function implementation, the user is to convert the latter into the expected data type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the smart contract function implementation, the retrieved data might need to be converted into the expected data type.
```

Reviewer: Might be worth mentioning utils+link here as well ?

### Write operations

> Smart contract state-changing operations could be executed via callSmartContract method. It executes a Smart contract call and returns the operation id associated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
State-changing smart contract operations can be executed via the `callSmartContract` method. It executes a smart contract call and returns the operation id associated.
```

> If no executor is provided, the default wallet account from the provided WalletClient will be used.

Reviewer: Same remark as above.

```typescript
const data: string = await web3Client.smartContracts().callSmartContract(
    {
        fee: 0n,
        maxGas: 200000n,
        coins: fromMAS("0.1"),
        targetAddress: scAddress,
        functionName: "play",
        parameter: new Args().serialize(), // this is based on input arguments
    } as ICallData,
    baseAccount
);
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:169](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L169)

> ### Read a contract with an other contract

Reviewer: See remark for ExecuteReadOnly

Smart contracts could also be constructed in order to read data from another contract via the `executeReadOnlySmartContract` method. In that case one 
could use the code below to read the data via a proxy contract:

```typescript
const data: IExecuteReadOnlyResponse = await web3Client
    .smartContracts()
    .executeReadOnlySmartContract(
        {
            fee: 0n,
            maxGas: 2000000n,
            coins: fromMAS("0.1"),
            contractDataBinary: compiledScFromSource.binary,
        } as IContractData,
        baseAccount
    );
```

Defined in [src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts:352](https://github.com/massalabs/massa-web3/blob/41f5634/src/web3/SmartContractsClient.ts#L352)

### getProtofiles

> Get the proto file of the contracts from the Massa Blockchain. It takes an array of contract addresses as parameter and returns the array of 

Reviewer: This is something very specific to Massa. We need to give more context! Maybe somewhere else and cross reference.
